So we have our server.
We have our SSH key.
We are now connected to our server.
What we're gonna do next
is we're gonna buy domain.
So if you have a domain, and I know
most of you probably squatting on a few,
that's okay.
If you haven't,
I'm gonna walk-through how to buy one.
And I won't say who to buy it from,
but that's one of my opinion.
And then, we're gonna put all together.
We're gonna connect your
domain to your server.
And then now, now we're cooking.
So now I'm going to roll up my sleeves
because now is where we get really,
really serious before some of
the stuff you may have done before,
creating SSH key,
maybe even creating a server.
But we're going to hook it
all together and by the end,
we're going to understand how the internet
works, how does any of this work.
So how does the internet work?
Probably my favorite interview question.
I don't ask it anymore
because I'm known for it.
So you're not getting any free passes
if I ever give you an interview, but
I like it because the internet
is a complex piece of machinery.
I said it before, but I'll say it again.
The internet is one of mankind's
greatest achievements.
And what's great about is like it
wasn't any one person's vision.
Yes it was sort of quasi invented
by DARPA, which is the military,
the US government created a loose sort
of internet, but nothing on this scale.
They just wanted computers to
be able to talk to each other.
It's some loose way.
Some universities wanted
to talk to each other.
But the internet itself where we are today
is not the result of any one company or
person or organization.
It is a collection of people,
a collection of organizations,
a collection of technologies
that somehow makes it so
that I talk to you live in a completely
different part of the world.
And you're all tuning in and
we're all creating these things.
And that's just that's really cool.
I don't know.
I think we get so caught up in
the day to day programming and
arguing over frameworks and VI or
vim or Emacs or just arbitrary things.
We get caught up in our day to day and
forgetting the magic of how all this stuff
works together and
it's incredibly complex.
So I want to talk a little
bit more about that.
So normally when I say how
does the internet work,
people assume it's some magic,
the browser talks to a server somewhere.
How does the server talk back to you?
Some other magic?
I don't know.
And that's usually the answer I get.
The reason why I like to ask how does
the internet work is because it gives you
a chance to shine on any part
of the stack that you want.
Remember earlier we talked
about what a stack means?
The operating system, the web server,
the application server.
It doesn't matter.
You can dive into any particular part and
you can give me a good answer.
That's why it's a really freeform answer
that tells me how thoughtful you are,
how much kind of research you've done.
And kind of how curious you are because
most of the stuff you don't need in your
day-to-day if you're
just creating webpages.
You're not going to need to know how to
spin up a server and open a firewall and
things like that.
That's probably done by someone else.
But it shows me how curious you are and
how much you pick up
on the overall ecosystem that we
exist in as front end engineers.
The core of the internet is
built on cooperation and rules.
Some corporations monetize.
So internet service providers.
Well they get paid,
we pay them to access the internet.
And they're paid to maintain their part
of the internet, the fibre lines, etc.
But what about the other products?
What about, I don't know,
talking to a server?
How's it that I can SSH into a server?
Like who made Ubuntu to say
you need to implement SSH and
then OSX implement SSH and then made it so
they can talk to each other?
Well it's just cooperation, it's just
saying hey here's a common standard we all
agree on it let's implement it in this
way and now we can all use it together.
And that's what the internet is,
just these series of decisions of
all of us, how we came together.
And I'm going on and
on about it but again it's so
magical how this all mysteriously works.
By the time we get to the end of this,
you'll be,
how in the world do all these disparate
pieces of technology come together and
make it work even though they're
completely unrelated to each other?
This is a very, very simplified
diagram of how requests works.
You have your computer, your computer
has a network card of some sort and
interface outward.
In the old days you had to buy a modem
you had to buy an exterior modem.
I don't know if any of you
familiar with phone lines.
I'm dating myself but there's something
called a 56k modem that ran over your
phone lines you had to plug it in and you
couldn't use the phone at the same time
as you're on Napster or
something trying to download the mp3.
Now I'm dating myself for sure.
But all computers need a network
card without that they can't talk to
the internet.
Pretty simple.
It's built in now it
didn't always used to be.
If your network card is going to talk to a
router somewhere, okay, maybe if you work
in an ISP, you can plug directly
into like one of the servers there.
But if you do that on the way you're
taking this course you probably know a lot
more about networking than I do.
But any network you connect
to is connected to a router.
The router enables so
we can have one IP address.
So we're here in Minneapolis right now.
We might have one IP address that
connects to the Internet, yet
all of our computers have
different internal IP addresses.
And that's what the router gives us.
It fans out and allows us to multiply our
connections without making too many more.
So your router will connect to
probably a modem, maybe not,
but probably a modem,
I didn't even include that here.
That connects to your ISP,
the person you're paying to
provide internet access to.
Everybody has an ISP of some sort.
That ISP may be a Tier 1,
it may not be a Tier 1, but
that ISP eventually is gonna
connect to a Tier 1 ISP.
Those ISPs are known as the backbone.
The backbones of the internet
are the big players.
They keep everything running,
the backbone goes down.
You feel it.
And we've seen it a few times and
probably the past year.
Usually, every year something some
part of the internet goes down.
And it's usually one of these backbones
that go down due to some mis configuration
or something like that.
From there, the backbones usually
talk to another backbone, and
these backbones are really, really fast.
These Tier 1 ISPs, they process speed
at probably a hundred gigs a second or
something like that, and
that's pretty slow these days, but
that's the minimum you
need to become a Tier 1.
Those ISPs will likely connect to
a data center somewhere in the world,
whether we talk about Rackspace,
ORs or digital lotion.
They're connecting to a data center.
That data center is going to is
going to have a server cluster
that server clusters owned by you or
me or any corporation or company.
From the server cluster you usually
had a load balancer of some kind.
So you don't just connect to one server,
that would make a lot of sense.
You overload that server for
all hitting the same ones.
We have a load balancer
to balance that out, and
that ultimately connects to your server.
And if I say how the internet works and
you have this slide or
you have this in your mind,
you're doing pretty well.
I left out a lot.
There is a lot here not shown.
We didn't talk about BGP.
We talked about modems a little bit.
We didn't talk about
interconnection agreements and
how does a ISP in the US
connect to an ISP in England?
And how do they talk to each other?
Where do those cables run?
Again, it's amazing this all works.
Look at all these different
steps to pull up a web page.
And we didn't even talk
about the software you need.
We didn't talk about browsers, the
standards they run on, that can read TCP
requests and HTTP requests and translate
those into something that is renderable.
There's a whole ecosystem.
So think back to that iceberg picture from
the beginning of class where you see front
end and you see everything else.
This is part of the everything else
that makes everything around us work.
So some terminology.
The internet is a network of networks.
That's all it is nothing fancy.
In the beginning days,
it was just some university
nerds talking to each other on
their very slow mainframes.
Now, we're all part of the internet,
and intranet is a private network.
If you work at a big corporation,
they have an intranet.
Most people do these days.
That's just a private internet,
it is connected the outside world but
it doesn't let people in and
we do that via firewalls VPNs, etc.
LAN is something you don't hear as much.
Anybody remember LAN parties?
Yeah.
See,
I can tell how old you are already based
on if you're nodding long enough to tell
me very clear.
Because in the old days before the
internet when the internet was too slow to
actually do that much,
you had to be on the same network and
play the same games in the same room
generally or in the same building.
Yes, LAN is great because, like Mark was
saying there's no latency, generally
speaking, and then there's something
called a WAN a wide area network,
not something as used as much but
similar to a LAN.
It's just say multiple
buildings at this time, but
that's generally been
replaced by internets.
And I keep saying IP, IP, IP address, etc.
IP just stands for Internet Protocol.
Remember the internet is built
on rules and cooperation.
So those rules are general in
the form of standards and protocols.
Internet Protocol just specifies, hey,
what is an address
connecting to a computer?
What does that look like?
What are the rules around it?
Are there letters allowed in there?
Is there spaces?
In Internet Protocol just says no.
Here's what an IP address is.
Here's the number of blocks we have and
I'll talk about that one second
when we get to IP addresses.
And here's the rules that govern
how these how this protocol works.
An IP address is just a label assigned
to any internet connected device.
Every single device on the world
has an IP address of some sorts.
Now, a lot of times because they're behind
a router, that internet address is just
192 dot 168 dot something those
are considered local addresses.
But again, they're wider when you connect
to a wider net you're going to have
generally one IP address.
And that's the beauty of the router,
it allows this multiplexing.
So I don't think people know this but
company's own blocks of
the internet in different forums
they own blocks of IP addresses.
So I forget off the top of my head which
governing body owns IP addresses but
somebody does.
And somebody says hey,
let's get an example, Cloudflare,
Cloudflare owns 1.1.1 and
they own an entire block.
Google owns an entire block of addresses.
Amazon owns this entire
block of addresses.
The government owns probably
the biggest block of IP addresses.
And again, you have to buy
these things from other people.
So it's a weird dichotomy here where
the internet's open and free, but
it's also not,
it's also owned by people too.
But it generally all works out
this private public cooperation.
So way back in the day, and this is
more of a math thing, people said, hey,
let's create an IP address.
An IP address will have four places,
four different blocks to specify
the location of the IP address.
So when we take IPv4, so it's going to
be something like that 127.0.0.1, etc.
People are like, that's enough.
That gives us roughly 4.3 billion
addresses, that should be plenty, right?
In 1990 when they're coming up with all
these standards in the 90s and the 80s.
That seemed like a lot, we'll never have 4
billion connected devices to the internet.
It turns out we ran out of IP addresses
quite a while ago, this was a problem.
4.3 billion is not enough.
Hence, we created IPv6.
IPv6 has 340 undecillion,
I'm pronouncing that right addresses.
So that effectively means we will
never run out of IP addresses.
I say this now they find that
the same thing 30 years ago,
we're never gonna run out of IP addresses
but I think we're pretty safe with IPv6.
IPv4 is 32 bits IPv6 is 128 bits so
that is exponentially larger.
So we're not really gonna dive into
IPv6 too much but if you ever see it is
a legitimate address it's just
one of the more modern standards.